I think what we'll do today, since we're getting started a little late, we'll have a little
longer practice session and in relation to that a little shorter reflection period.
So, being kind of thinking about these four thoughts that turn the mind toward the Dharma
and of course again and again and again, as we begin every practice, calling them to our
mind and our heart and then with joy, devotion, contentment with all of our freedoms and
circumstances
that are so favorable, with really vast Bodhichitta and purity perception and that motivation
we begin our practice and so we've gone over of course many times in the past reflecting
on this precious human birth with all the freedoms and favorable conditions.
We also, I think, one of the more previous times reflected a little bit on impermanence.
So then I was thinking to just reflect again about karma, right? The results of virtuous
and unvirtuous actions which are causes are inexorable. This very profound teaching from
the beginning that this great kindness teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni gave us, so encompassing
and so fundamental, right? Even we say every day everything that proceeds from, for everything
that proceeds from a cause, the tatagata has explained the cause and likewise the cessation.
This is the doctrine of the great sage, of the great ascetic, of this great kindness
teacher, the Buddha, who pointed out the truth of interdependence. So these four noble truths
from the very beginning are really teachings on karma.
And what is karma, right? Is action. I think sometimes, maybe for we fortunate ones who've
been exposed to the teachings, when we hear the word karma we know it's not only karma
isn't just what happens to us, but we also have a play in how we react to some degree
and even more so based on how we react we have some play in propelling karma. So this
law of cause and effect, the natural law of cause and effect that the Buddha pointed out
in these very first turning teachings that only deepen through the second turning, the
third turning. And as the obscurations are released, as bodhicitta is increased, as wisdom
increases interdependence and relative truth becomes pure and vibrant, nothing but enlightened.
But in the meantime for we little ones, the Buddha gave these kind teachings on pointing
out these real fundamental teachings like we have this four noble truths, the suffering,
the second noble truth, there's cause for suffering, the third noble truth. There's
such a thing as the cessation or the end of suffering, freedom from suffering and for
there's the path to realizing that freedom. So these are all nothing but teachings on
cause and result, causes and conditions bring result, right? So the first two are focusing
more on samsara on suffering. The second two truths are based on freedom from suffering
and the conditions and causes we can engage that bring up, bring us that, that help us
to investigate our true nature and create conditions that are more attuned and more
helpful for us to absolutely have more and more direct perception of that true nature.
So karma means action. All of our actions have their results. You know, the cause of
suffering, the cause of each one of us of our samsaras for all the infinite sentient
beings is of course, as we know, the fundamental ignorance of knowing the true nature, the
true openness, the inconceivable great emptiness nature of everything that arises. And that
very, very deep, deep down, you know, our samsara arises from not recognizing from that fundamental
ignorance and based on that from deep, deep, subtle, profound hope and fear reject, you
know, aversion and attachment. We wave this great spell of samsara of this interdependent
web of confusion that we have. And the Buddha, of course, he taught that even emptiness, at
least intellectually can be comprehended pretty easily. But the Buddha taught karma, the law
of cause and effect, to truly understand it, one has to be omniscient, one has to be fully
enlightened. But there's basic things we can all ways we can, we can understand karma,
which is what again, if we always remember is one, it's inevitable. Every single experience
that we're having, every perception we're having, the experience of our current body
and the emotions we have, the way we read things, the choices we make, to do or not
do things, all of that is nothing but karma. So it's a really interesting play of like
what appears to be our choices. But it's all, again, fabricated, because like the Buddha
pointed out, every, we have this sense of I, but if we look at everything that, well,
what makes up this I, such as the teachings on the aggregates, these like groupings of
different classes of our gross and subtle experience that makes up ourself, when we
go to look, we can't find that, right? So this basic ignorance and the actions we do
causes our samsara. So I'm going to kind of go over things very skim over things, because
I think it's really important we practice. And then next week, we'll go a little bit
more in depth into some of these details. So while we have all these sense of self and
all of our experiences and everything we've done, its effects are with us now. So along
with, you know, all the teachings the Buddha gave on such as the five aggregates, he also
gave teachings on, you know, the 18 dhatus or, you know, which is essentially other ways
we frame our sense of self and our experience, right is there's our con our consciousness
and all of our sense consciousnesses inside inside. And then there's the objects of those
consciousnesses, all the sights, all the sounds, all the smells, all the tastes, all the sensations
,
all the mental perceptions we have are the objects of our mental consciousness, of our
eye consciousness, of our ear consciousness, of our nose consciousness, of our tongue consciousness
,
of our body consciousness. And the habitual patterns, again, that help kind of connect
those two realms are then these organs, right? There's our eyes, the eye organ, the ear organ,
the nose organ, the tongue organ, the body organ, the mental organ, which is the brain.
That's through all right, all the senses are going there, all the consciousness are, says
are perceiving through them, their objects, subject and objects. These are all habitual
patterns. And what we're doing in our practice, right, is we're breaking down our habitual
patterns, which is to say we're increasing our wisdom. The other thing, again, we say
every day, right, from everything that proceeds from a cause, the tatagata has explained the
cause. And likewise, the cessation, these four noble truths. And then so those are the truths.
These are kind of the views. But how do we actualize that? Along with our joy, appreciation,
our bodhicitta, our trust, we actualize that through this basic thing that sums up all
of our practices. Avoid harmful, un-virtuous actions. Engage in positive, helpful, balancing,
virtuous activities. Tame our own mind. So on that rough edge of things, become more
and more aware of what's helpful and what's harmful. Try not to engage with what's harmful.
Let go. Engage more with what's helpful. And then of course with that, the practice of
increasing our wisdom. More and more directly perceiving, you know, what's both on the level
of that relative level, what's helpful, but also having more and more insight into the
empty nature of ourself, of the world, but direct and full of, again, the qualities not
only of that wisdom, but inseparable from that love, compassion. So all of our bodhicitta
and our presence. And so along with these other teachings, fundamental teachings, such
as the five aggregates, you know, the 18 sense fields, so what we call them, or the 18 dhatus,
there's the 12 nidanas, which again are kind of specifically how the Buddha taught a way
we can look at kind of the mechanics of how karma happens. So again, we'll go over that
more next week, but I'm sure you've heard of these 12 links of interdependent origination
or tendril, the way the Buddha taught, the way the whole web and weave of our whole perception
of self and other and action every moment, every day, every month, every year, every life
from beginningless time, this infinite disguise, that's called samsara happens. And so again,
that's, that's basically these 12 links we've heard. So maybe we can go through them. Whether
or not, you know, it's good to remember these things, but don't worry about remembering
it now. Because again, maybe next week, I'll try to send everyone something we can look
at visually, because I know that helps me too. So the links essentially right, are showing
this web, how everything the interdependent works and how the cycles of karma happen,
whether it's every moment, or lifetime to lifetime, it kind of can be applied to all
those stages of how karma happens. Again, for sentient beings, this is what we're talking
about samsara being caught in this web in the wheel of life, like we see in the monasteries.
That shows from the basic ignorance, hatred and attachment. The all the six realms arise
through this interdependent co origination. And what's there, this huge monster, which
is essentially the great emptiness. So right, it said, even at the time of death, most every
being is introduced to their true, open, brilliant nature, and is terrified and goes looking
for shelter. That's kind of what that I think in one way, what that big old monster is pointing
out. So this wheel of interdependence begins ignorance, the fundamental not knowing of
how things are. This is the real ground that allows all of our samsara to function. Based
in the seed in that ground is then the second link, which is called the karmic formations
or karmic seeds. That means all of our past actions, all the past actions from our previous
moments, all of our habitual patterns that are stored in our alaya and are in our way
in the ground of our ignorance, these seeds are there in the ground of our ignorance,
these habitual patterns. And then, you know, so those karmic seeds in the ground of our
ignorance, they're going to just naturally give rise to consciousness and our habitual
patterns. So then consciousness is the third link. Then it goes on through name, name and
form, you know, kind of the conditions that our consciousness needs to begin to be embodied
within that embodiment, then the six senses, the habitual pattern of our six senses begin
to engage. And then they, again, are the habitual patterns of our six senses are not only the
physical organs and the consciousnesses, but their objects as well. So once that is happening,
then we have the next stage, which is called contact when our consciousness meets through
our senses, meets the objects of our senses, they're all that circuits flowing. And then
the habitual patterns of how we feel our feelings about it happen. And then there's the next
thing is, do we want more of it or less of it, you know, so that craving and then grasping.
And then there's the 10th link, which is called becoming and then 11th birth. And then the
12th old age and death. And then again, or decay and death. And then the cycles complete.
So that's a lot of details, ignorance, karmic seeds, bring forth consciousness. And within
that is the name and form, the six senses engaging, contact, feeling, craving, grasping,
becoming or birth, birth, old age, and death. So that cycle is perpetually happening. And
right, we can see within that are again, looking at cause and effect. So these first, and also
there's our sense to write in every moment, we have the illusion of past present future.
So in a way, these, it was like me, Palmer, but she explains these first two links, ignorance
and karmic seeds. In a way that's like what our present that's the past of our present
moment. Or even our, we could say our present life, present life, present moment, the past
of our present moment is what can be called here, ignorance and karmic seeds. And our
present moment is then the next, what like five or so links all of our, the way our,
the way our experience of our consciousness and our sense fields, being active with subject,
object, how we feel, how we engage all of that, what we choose to do and what we choose
not to do, how we feel about it. All that happens within the present moment. So consciousness,
name, form, six senses, contact, feeling, craving, grasping, becoming, those are all
within these 12 links, what we can consider the present moment. And of course they're
links, but this is all like instantaneous to our perception. And then again, on the
bigger scale, it could be called this present life as well. And then the future, the future
is going to come be the result, right, of the way we engage with the present moment.
What that gives birth to, how that exists, how that again, everything that is, you know,
comprised of parts and conditioned is bound to die, is impermanent. So then when that
ceases to be, you know, decays, dies, disappears, falls apart, that's the, that's for the future.
So there's past present future in the sense of karma too. Within our present moment, we
really don't, again, all, all of our present moment is circumstantial. There's really nothing
we can do about it. It's totally based on our habitual patterns, our actions and our
ignorance that's been, you know, perpetuated. And thankfully, we have such good fortune,
right? We have, we have some connection with the true nature and these great wisdom teachings,
which is equally part of our karma. Karma is not just bad. Knowing about it is important.
Like not knowing the four noble truths. That's the cause of, that's ignorance. We have been
introduced to these by this great kindness teacher. So within this present moment, the
results, right, of our, you know, the results are our consciousness and our whole experience.
So that goes up to within these 12 links, again, consciousness, name and form, our sense
fields activated, you know, the habitual patterns on the level of how we feel, associate value,
you know, either have fear or want or need needs, hopes or fears towards our experiences,
how we engage with them. All of that is kind of the results is the effect of our past.
We don't have a lot to do with it. But then what makes all the difference now is with
more mindfulness, with more openness, with more awareness of the inevitability of that
negative actions based on negative emotions, bring unfavorable results and actions based
on virtuous, meaning kindness, natural qualities, bring forth more favorable results, especially
with wisdom, with bodhicitta. So then what we refrain from doing, what we engage with
doing, this is what makes the difference for the future, right? These are the causes we're
creating then the causes in the present moment. This is the aspect of the present moment that
we're bringing forth inevitable future events, future experiences. So how we feel about something,
then what we actually do or don't do is what then propel pushes forth future karma to manifest
and become a present moment, right? So of course the path of Dharma is one of ever increasing
our wisdom, taming our own mind, knowing our own mind. And along with that path is this
aspect of refraining from harm, engaging in benefit. So then in regards with these teachings
of the 12 links, right, another where that first link, the more we examine our own egolessness,
have not only intellectual understanding, but more and more direct perception of emptiness
of self and then emptiness of other, direct perception into the great openness that we're
increasing our wisdom. And then again, that brings more freedom and more openness, more
flexibility maybe at least in our view within our present experience. Within that present
experience as we're more and more aware of our habitual patterns and more aware of what's
helpful and what's not helpful, then we can really choose and have more control over refraining
from harm and even better engaging in benefit. And so that's again in this next, that link
between that present moment, how we engage between feeling and then how we feel about
it and engage with it, it brings up on just without a doubt, future experiences. And of
course in the teachings, when we plant a seed, the seed in the right conditions brings many,
many fruits. Right. And so there's that. So another way of looking at that, right, we're
increasing our wisdom and this point too, within the wheel of interdependent of karma
happening in the inevitability of karma is both again, with the view that harmful negative
emotions and actions based on negative emotions and bring forth negative experiences, more
confusion, actions based on more wisdom and natural qualities of love and compassion and
wisdom. Those bring forth more and more positive experiences, helpful experiences that's called
merit. So within our whole path of these two wings of our practice, right, are accumulating
merit and wisdom. Here merit, it's not just like a badge we're putting on for being good
boy or a good girl. This is like means we're truly acting in a natural way. We're truly
activating our bodhicitta with less grasping, upturning our own samsara by activating the
six paramitas based on truly boundless sincere for boundless aspirations that brings upon,
you know, more positive quality. So we're accumulating that's accumulating merit, which
again within the law of calls and effect. That's what we're doing here with this link
with our present moment, engaging in benefit. And again, then from the view of the enlightened
ones of our great kindness teachers and guides, who've given us all these tools, given us
this nundra practice itself, as well as whole nine yanas to explore and engage and attain
fulfillment, mature our own minds and then be true of true benefit and refuge and sources
of peace for the infinite beings of samsara. We have this great tendril. So again, from
the enlightened perspective, everything is empty, everything is open. And yet even the
enlightened ones are working with karma. In the sense of our favorite, they're not slaves
to karma. They're not caught up in the nets of illusion and obscurations and emotional
and knowledge obscurations. They're totally liberated from those. And yet interdependence
always works. There's relative truth. There's absolute truth. And we're, we can't, while
there are in union, when we're truly perceive the truth of that, they are in union, but
we shouldn't confuse them while we're still young ones, you know? So like Guru Pashay said,
my view is as vast as space. And yet my attention to the law of cause and effect is as fine as
flower. That's how these great ones can give us these teachings, these skillful means practices
of the Vajrayana, which through interdependence is working with our own samsara to undo the
nets of our samsara and reveal the pure relative truth display of our Buddha nature, right?
Keeping out that beautiful, bounteous bodhicitta for our own self. So keeping our emptiness
awareness along with our bodhicitta, true bodhicitta motivation is so critical. And
now I said I wasn't going to talk for long, but I did. So maybe we'll leave it there.
Forgive me if I've forgotten some big thing or if you're all there scratching your heads.
But you know, we'll kind of revisit some of these things next week. And if anyone has
any questions, you know, please write in and maybe specifically about some of these things.
I wish we were all here in the same room to kind of talk in real time, but we're not.
But we have this wonderful opportunity to be together this way. So thank you. And now
we'll work on again using this favorable moment to accumulate our merit, our wisdom, and know
it's inevitable, you know, as much as we can be truly frightened by seeing like the inevitability
of our past actions. But just that is purifying, right? On every level of the nundra practice,
we can see how we're working to, again, to free up the nets of our samsara to bring more
peace for all beings, ourselves and others. So recognizing a mistake for a mistake is
purification. And we have these beautiful, skillful means. And equally, so when we say
this in the four thoughts, the results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions are inexorable.
We can both connect with, oh, you know, just for ourselves and for others, seeing how when
we're acting with ignorance and the five poisons engaged in grasping, it's, if anything, boring,
but even more so kind of terrifying and scary, right? But again, that's why we need to really
keep our practice and not get really look to looking for our own mind, what we're experiencing
and mingling our mind with the great enlightened ones with Guru Rinpoche, inseparable from
our root teacher. And that the effects of that are inevitable. When we truly connect
with the Dharma, hear the Dharma, contemplate the Dharma, bring it into our heart. Don't
shirk away from the shadowy places or the harmful places, but let them be part of our
bodhicitta practice. Embrace everything according to our abilities. You know, inevitably, we're
turning everything to the path. Bless my mind to turn toward the Dharma. Bless my Dharma
path to bless my, bless my mind to turn towards the Dharma. Bless, I'm totally spacing out.
Bless my mind to turn towards the Dharma. Bless my Dharma practice to follow the path. Bless
my path to be free of delusion. Bless me that all delusion be transformed into wisdom. And
this is inevitable when we're really embracing everything with our practice. So yeah, contemplating
these four thoughts, both as we set out, but also while we're from moment to moment, as
we're doing our practice and in our day, helps us recheck, check in with our motivation,
right? Because it's motivation that makes Karma more or less strong. That's definitely
really vital in the Buddhist teachings. How we feel about what we're going to do, how
we feel while we're doing it, how we feel if we completed it, makes the Karma stronger,
if we have really strong feelings and good feelings about it. So anyway, I'll stop here.
And we'll just take a few moments to just rest in silence, recenter.
Okay. All right. So, we're going to start with our next question. So, we're going to start.
We cite the seven line prayer, lineage prayers. And we'll go to our nundra practice.